---
layout: post
title:  "On Money"
date:   2021-08-20 07:47:02 -0400
categories: general
---

This post is about an observation: money is an imperfect solution to the role it plays in society.

Money serves two important purposes in a specialized society like ours. It manages the distribution of resources, and it provides an incentive for people to produce resources. It provides creation incentive by linking production to consumption. You get to consume in proportion to what you contribute, as measured by the money you receive for your efforts.

The world produces [significantly more food than we need](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/241746569_We_Already_Grow_Enough_Food_for_10_Billion_People_and_Still_Can't_End_Hunger), and yet multitudes do not have enough money for food security, or have to work themselves to the bone just to get by. Let me extend this situation to an extreme for the sake of argument. Suppose in a highly advanced future, automation handled all agriculture, industry, and all the other needs of life. Only one human is really needed to perform the necessary overseeing. No one else had a job. That one person had a 100% contribution to world productivity. Should that entitle them to all the worlds resources? Should everyone else need to starve or survive on the one employed person's generosity? Taking a step back to the situation in our world today, when there is more than enough for everyone, we use a resource distribution system that still has people starve. Money as a regulator of resources distribution fails us. An "efficient" regulator would have it be so that if we were producing enough of a resource then everyone would get enough of it.

Money works well in small, non-industrialized setting where resources are scarce. However, when mechanization can multiply the product of human effort many times, organization can make it so that the output of a company is greater than the sum of individual efforts, and technology can allow scaling to an extent that was unimaginable a few decades ago, many "produce" a lot more than they can consume. This throws proportion out of whack, and people whose work does not enjoy the benefit of the scaling effect cannot hope to compete in their relative "contribution" to total production. Yet because of the (largely) free market, they _do_ have to compete to get the same resources. A tech startup billionaire, a regular software engineer, and a warehouse workers walk into a city looking for housing. The scaling effect means the gulf between each of these three is huge.
<!-- Something about what my point is exactly with this last sentence. -->

People fear the rise of artificial intelligence, fearing that it will take away jobs from people. Suppose that we remove money from the picture, shouldn't that be a good thing? Wouldn't we _want_ a world where humans don't have to work as hard and can pursue their hearts desires? Yet with production proportional to contribution, that is a legitimate problem.

At the same time, historically humans have done poorly at the society scale when there is no incentive to work. As of today, we still very much need human sweat to pay for needs as a species. Money in the capitalist setting does a fairly good job at incentivising work, and any replacement will need to handle this problem.

While I don't yet have better ideas for how we could do resource allocation while incentivising productivity, it seems like money is going to grow increasingly inefficient as we move towards a world of less scarcity. Perhaps there is a radical solution that steps entirely away from money and the barter system, a relic of simpler times.